We're in the sixth floor of the library, and I have
the joy of chatting with John Thomas about his A&M
experiences, just so recent, a young man like him.
John, try your mic and see how it works. Well, we'll
see if it picks up. I'll bet it does.
John, to begin with, to introduce yourself to a
reader or a listener in future years, Describe
family background, where you grew up, where you
went to high school. Tell about yourself before
coming to A&M. Well, I was born in Pampa, Texas.
better known for the home of Randy Mattson. Dad was
working in the oil fields then. He was a roommate of
Earl Rudders at Tarleton. When Earl left
Tarleton, he came to A&M, and Dad
went to the oil fields for 10 years. That was right
at the tail end of the Depression. He spent 10 years
there and then came back to A&M. I was about three
when he came back to school here. He went as county
extension agent, assistant agent at Naples and
then in February of 42 moved to Wellington,
Collingsworth County as county agent. Was there
17 years. was in the middle of the first grade when
we got to wellington and graduated high school
there how big wellington and wellington had about
33 3400 population when we got there it was a
ranching and farming community right against
oklahoma
there in the early 50s in my high school years i got
out in 55 and came to A&M but during the 50s that
drought and population had reached about 51,
5,200 county populations about 25,000 and we
lived on a farm there. I grew up in 4-H club work and
A&M
was Probably because of my interest in ag and
particular interest in entomology as a result of
having kept honeybees for a 4-H club project. I was
aware that A&M was the only place you could go and
major in entomology and a strong ag school, and we
had come to 4-H Roundup. Back then, coming to
College Station was about like going to China. It
was a long way away. And describe one of those
trips. How did y'all get here? Well, usually we
came in either a packed car or in a pickup pulling a
trailer with four club calves. We did show at
Houston and at Dallas and Sulphur Springs. We had
judging teams that went to Lubbock and West Texas
State for competition and Roundup then down here
in Stephenville. Those were the towns that hosted
many of these teams and that's where you got
exposed to the world is when you went to a livestock
show with an animal or went on a judging trip with
the team. Do you remember your first visit ever to
College Station? Yeah I do. When I got into
beekeeping in 1947
I had kept bees and I got an invitation to speak at
the Texas Beekeepers Association meeting
November 1950. My mama put me on a train at
Childress and I rode the train all day we stopped at
Hearn about it was just getting dark and that's
where you ate we had eaten lunch at Dallas and we ate
supper at Hearn arrived
here at the college station I
guess you would call it the ticket counter cause
when I stepped out There was just a whole bunch of
planks, like a patio, and down at the end was a
little small shed. It was dark. Wasn't a soul in
sight. I didn't know what to do. And about that
time, Dr. F.L. Thomas stepped out from behind
that, I guess it was a ticket counter, and I that's
was my first trip to A&M and the meetings were held
over at the Y and
that was before the MSC was built. What was your
impression of A&M as a result of that visit? Well I
really didn't see much of the campus then Where I
got an impression of the campus was coming to 4-H
Roundup, the state Roundup, where kids, probably
800 or 900 back then. I think there's around 3,000
or 4,000 that come now. But that's where we got to,
usually came down on the judging team. and we got to
see the animals of classes met a few people but they
kept us real busy so we couldn't get in trouble
and were people friendly did that make did you get
any I didn't have enough yes we met mostly the
faculty people like Fred Elliott that for years
did the barbecuing for roundup and John Box and
John E Hutchison Director of Extension and Floyd
Lynch who was responsible for the 4-H programs in
Texas back then but they had our activities so
tightly scheduled that we primarily enacted with
people over in Animal Science when it was judging
and giving our reasons and that kind of thing but I
really didn't know any of them until I came down
here as a freshman In fact, I didn't realize that
A&M was all military and all mail when I got here in
the summer of 55. I figured it out. I came down here
because I wasn't sure that I could pass college
work coming out of a small high school. And I think
Mom and Dad felt like that I needed to get out of
there. so i came down on monday after i graduated
high school on friday so you came you began in the
summer yes uh what did you how did you get here
describe that trip how'd you get here what'd you
bring well i got here probably like most aggies do
back then i uh packed What I needed, a couple pair of
jeans and some underwear and a suit and a pair of
tennis shoes and a pair of boots and ironing board,
iron and a rub board to do my clothes and shaving and
toothpaste and toothbrush with those in a duffel
bag and a footlocker. Mama took me, she knew that
the vet was coming down for a clinic. But she took me
out south side of town and told me, go to A&M and
don't come home. Did you hitchhike? Yes. But Mama,
I'm sure, knew that the vet was fixing to go to a
clinic down here because Curtis Thaxton, who was
the vet there at Wellington, picked me up. And I had
a room. had a job i roomed over at mall hamilton's
right back of the campus area there at north gate
and she was a mom of the i didn't know at the end but
later on i figured it out j.w hamilton who was
sheriff brazos county and i had a job in the
entomology department just across the railroad
tracks over there at the lab with neil randolph
what did it pay 17 cents an hour Of course, I worked
nights during the week at the pharmacy where
Lupo's is now. And I can't remember, Black's was
over at Eastgate. I can't remember the name of the
pharmacy, but I jerked sodas. And then on
weekends, I worked at the Phoenix Station where
the chicken oil company is there, where Oak
College and College of Maine come together. And
you had those jobs lined up before you got here?
Well, no, I got the drugstore job in the I had the
anemology job with Neil Randolph, and I spent the
whole summer shelling vetch seed. He had treated
some plots to control vetch brookhead up at
Greenville. And so you rode with the vet all the way
down here, and describe how you enrolled in those
summer classes. Well, we went on with Sabisa and
stood in line and registered. And you'd have to go
over to the tables that were labeled English or
math. The departments had their tables. And you'd
start out, if you had a major, you'd start out with a
schedule of courses that you were approved to take
or should take. Then you went to each one of the
departments, and they figured if the class had
filled up or not, what times you were going to take
them. Of course, during summer school, there
wasn't any problem in getting the classes that you
needed to take. I took one course each semester. I
took math, which was trig, and that was an advanced
course then. And so how did you survive those
courses? Pretty well? Yeah. much better than I
really thought I would.
The coursework turned out not to be that
difficult, but I remained scared until I
graduated. And so you're here all summer taking
course and working. Did you go home at the end of
summer school? No. Stayed? Too far. Too far. and I
didn't have a car. So I just, when I came in May, the
first time I went home was Christmas. Who did you,
how did you make some friends? Mostly where I was
working, out at the lab. That's where I met people
and then at church. Where did you go to church? A&M
United Methodist Church. Back then it was College
Station Methodist Church. Describe that
congregation in those years. It was made up mostly
of faculty and students. The thing that always
impressed me was the fact that nearly all of A&M's
presidents back then were members of that church.
Including? Earl Rudder, Jarvis Miller,
Williams, Dr. Williams. Was Harrington? No, Dr.
Harrington was not. Gilchrist? No. Bolton? No.
And you had gone to church then at home, so this was
not a... Did you go on Sunday nights, or was there
a... There was NYF, or Wesley Foundation. And they
served supper? Yes.
I said I went. And you made some friends there.
Yeah. Okay. then describe the beginning of the
fall and the core and all of those realities?
Well, it was mentally and physically demanding.
Of course, the thing that really impressed me was
the fact, in retrospect, was what it cost to go to
school here. I believe that because I paid all of my
expenses working that first summer 17 cents an
hour and in September I got a raise I got 25 cents an
hour and that was back then big money uh I think most
of the staff made 27 cents an hour but anyway uh
because being in the Corps and they furnished so
much of your uniforms and uh tuition and books
really weren't that expensive and if even at 17
cents an hour if you worked full-time in the
summer, you could pay your bills. I worked
half-time. I worked 20 hours during the semester,
fall and spring semester, but I worked full-time
in the summers. Alright, so you were put in what
outfit? B-triple-A. What was the nickname of that
outfit? B-triple-A. They were extremely formal.
Two of the four years that I was in BAAA, we won the
General Moore Award, which was the elite outfit on
campus. And it was based on academics,
intramurals,
military drill. You got points for most of the
activities. So best all around outfit. Yes. So it
was a good unit. And I got some good training and a
lot of hazing. I didn't miss my daddy's whoopings
when I got here. Where did, where were y'all
quartered? We swapped from the Sbisa area to the
Duncan area every other year. So we were in dorm 17
when we were over in the Duncan area, the one backed
by the USDA building. We were in six and eight the
two years that we were over in the Sabisa area. So
now this is the fall of, you're a freshman in the
fall of 1955.
Korean War is over. Just ending. Describe how you
were introduced to all of the routine of the Corps
and the dormitory and all that. Well it was, it was
very formal. They all, you had the CO, and the first
sergeant you had a week you got down here a week
before everybody else did and we took some tests
and I never did I don't remember whether these were
comparable to an ACT or an SAT But one of the first
things we did was go over to Sabisa and spent most of
the whole day. I think they actually, we were over
there at 8, and about 8.30 we started taking tests.
And I don't know what those were for because I never
had anybody ask me other than where I graduated. I
don't even remember submitting grades or
anything. If you had enough to pay your tuition,
you could get an A&M. Now, there were several
things that worked against you staying here.
There were 43 in our freshman outfit, 43 freshmen.
Midterm, there were 27 of us left. And I believe
there were nine or 11 that graduated eventually,
not in four years, but eventually graduated out of
that As you look back on those numbers and those
people, about how many of them fail, left, because
academically they couldn't do the work?
At that point in time, because a number of factors
contribute to that. One is maturity. But
certainly the lifestyle here was not
what fit the expectations of a number of people. I
know the freshman next door to Fish Van Zant and I,
and Joe Van Zant was from Wheeler, and he and I
roomed together as freshmen. And we had a Bill
Cleland and a Fish Ryan Patterson. who came out of
uh Bel Air and Houston both of them ex brilliant
individuals Bill majored in uh modern uh foreign
languages then it's modern language now and
physics and uh he's now with I think he's retired
but he is uh for years he's been with Princeton and
does uh uh super atomic collision research spent a
lot of time over in France and uh was just excited
about coming home when the thing was up and going
and the physics profession had invested so much in
that he thought he might come home but anyway uh
Bill and Ryan were next door and Bill graduated as
valedictorian in our class in 59. Ryan, I watched
him cry many, many nights after sophomore chewed
him out. He was extremely sensitive. He went to
Rice. He transferred after his first semester
here at Rice and he was valedictorian at Rice.
Well, what my question really is, about what
portion went? About half of those flunked out.
Okay. Several reasons, but about half of them
flunked out. The other just left because of the
hazing, and they weren't going to tolerate being
treated like that, and it just, they couldn't
handle that. It wasn't to their liking. It didn't
match their personality, their expectations, so
they left. So A&M had a way of controlling
the population here, it isn't handled like it is
today. Describe
how you and your old lady got acquainted and how
y'all Well, we knew each other in high school
because we showed together. Joe was off a ranch up
near Wheeler, and we knew each other and asked to be
together. I got in B-triple-A because of a cousin
of mine who was a senior in 55. Yeah, 55.
Recommended. I didn't know anything about
outfits or units. Most of the freshmen were just
put in a unit. But if you had a request, it would be
considered. Describe the routine that first fall
in that outfit, a typical day of classes. Well, the
thing that you had to get used to down here that I had
the greatest difficulty getting used to is the
weather. Coming from the panhandle, there's no
air conditioning. And over at Ma Hamilton's, she
had eight bedrooms, four on each side of the
hallway upstairs. And there was someone in each
bedroom. The bedroom was just a small room,
probably 14 by 16 in size, had a bed in it, had a
lavatory to wash your face in it, and had a chair and
a desk. in the restroom was at the end of the hall to
take a bath or to use a pot. But I got down here and
nearly died coming out of a dry, low humidity area.
Like I found out the temperatures weren't that
high but I couldn't sleep at night. And I'd go down
and take a cold shower come back to my room and lay
down in bed wet and naked. And I could sleep until
I'd dry off and start sweating again. And then I'd
wake up. Got no sleep that first summer. You get
used to it after a while, but it takes a while. But as
a freshman, every bit of your time is very tightly
scheduled, including study time. Everybody
knows everywhere that you're supposed to be and at
what time. Your Saturdays were, Saturday
mornings we went to class, but Saturday
afternoons we spent on the grill field working off
the hours of bull ring. Go through the routine of a
weekday. What time did you get up? What did you do at
what hour? Go from getting up to going to bed.
I can't remember what it's called, but the whistle
blew about 6 o'clock in the morning. You had about
20 minutes to get up, shave, get dressed, and then
we'd fall out in front of the dorms in units. You
were checked to make sure that your shoes were
polished and all your brass was polished and that
you were dressed and looked sharp. Then we marched
to the dining hall, either Duncan or Sabisa.
Freshmen of course stood at a brace and served
everybody else. And if you were lucky, they all of
the seniors and then juniors and then sophomores
would leave and you would get what food was left on
the table and you went to class and being in a
science I had labs so most of the time I was in class
from eight until five and then at five you got back
to the dorm and we had intramurals something was
going on throughout the entire school year and you
participated in swimming or wrestling or
horseshoes or washers throw or basketball or flag
football or golf or whatever
came back at lunch you fell out at 12 o'clock
marched over to the dining hall and served the
upperclassmen and then you went back to the dorm
and always remember I always wondered what a
chocolate eclair really tasted like and I had to
wait until I was a sophomore to find out. But it was a
very regimented existence. Alright then after
supper was it always back to your room? 7 o'clock CQ
lasted till 10. And you, unless you had a pass or a
permit, you were at your desk supposedly
studying. The only thing you could get up for is to
go to the restaurant. What did you and your buddy,
where did you and your buddies go to escape that?
Let's say you had an hour in the day that was not
scheduled.
Where could you go hide out to? I had so many class
hours, we would go to the MSC or we'd go to the
church, the Wesley Foundation. Bob Walker told me
that's where he discovered the Church Christ.
He's a very, very active member of the Church
Christ. One of his close friends, a roommate I
think it was, took him over there and that was a
place where the sophomores wouldn't bother him. I
guess that I was just too slow and too dumb to figure
all that out. But
I was in class most of the time and I think that's
probably the reason I didn't have, I know I always
envied the business majors because they went to
class in the morning and then they took naps in the
afternoon if they could keep the sophomores out of
the room. But I spent most of the time in class. All
right. During the day. Describe some of that
hazing that freshman year. Some of the routine.
Well, every time you turned around, somebody was
having you hit a brace and telling you to do
something or you were always busy taking care of
sophomores, juniors, and seniors, whether it was
shining shoes or what have you. when you didn't do
things well enough then you got a good harsh
talking to after CQ and you'd get they'd get you in a
room and spell out for you what you're supposed to
do and how you're supposed to do it and you you had to
be able to kind of grin inside you didn't dare grin
on the outside and just let that run off because it
was constant. All right, how often did the board
get used?
Probably about once a week. For what kind of evils?
Well, at halftime you had no idea what you'd done.
It was just for good bull. But it didn't take much.
Usually though on those situations they were
playing games and having fun. That was not a form of
discipline. Mocking bull ring on Saturday
afternoon was discipline. They gave you
demerits, wrote them out, signed them, and then it
worked up through the process and then you had to
work those hours off. They'd give you demerit for
not making your bed right. for failing to shine
your shoes, for being late falling out for lunch or
for a drill or for marching at the game or what have
you. So, those were just experiences that you. And
the bull ring was where? Over behind Duncan.
Behind Duncan? Where they used to build the
bonfire, where the press is now in the parking lot.
Yeah, yeah, okay. all right um let's see uh
chow hall routine um what was what was a fish duty
what what duty did a fish have in the dining hall
well you made sure that uh all the plates were full
of course all the tables were served by uh cadets
anywhere from freshmen to seniors and uh you made
sure that the uh tea glasses, coffee. You just made
sure that they had food and drink. What was your, in
those years, what were your favorite and your
unfavorite Aggie foods? Well, as a freshman, I
would love to have tried a chocolatey Claire. But I
didn't find, we complained about the food. But I
gained weight. I came here weighing about 124
pounds and at the end of my freshman year I took golf
and weightlifting as my PE courses. Back then,
that first week you had to swim back four times the
length of the pool and if you couldn't you PE was
swimming I guess the goal was make sure every Aggie
could swim because that's what they insisted on
and
the least favorite probably was scrambled eggs
because they nearly always were watery but most of
the food you complain about but It was nutritious
and it was good. I don't remember having a problem
with food. Were you introduced to any new foods at
A&M? Anything that you were not accustomed to?
Yeah, chocolate eclairs. I'd never seen one. I got
half of one one time after everybody had left, but
that's what I really enjoyed as a sophomore and a
junior and a senior was Did you and your buddies
ever smuggle food back to the dormitory? Under
your shirt? Yeah, that's the only way. You grabbed
it as you left and hurried to class. That's about
the only way that you've got food, except on
weekends. We got, because a lot of the seniors and
juniors would be gone on weekends, so that's when
we got to eat at a normal pace and got actually some
real food. Share with this machine some of the chow
hall slang for foods that you remember. Of course,
bread was dough.
Ah, yes.